# What Is Cryptography?

## Quick Summary
Cryptography is an ancient concept that’s been adapted over the years into the mathematical vision it is now. With cryptography being used everywhere, even right under your nose, what really is it?

### What Is Cryptography?
Cryptography is the processes, practices and algorithms used to ensure that messages, files and data are securely exchanged without being viewed by unauthorised third parties. Originally used solely for secure communications as far back as ancient Greece, ciphertext was the initiator of cryptography today.

While in ancient Greece they used a cipher to convert plaintext messages, in modern times, we use algorithms and keys to encrypt and decrypt our data. Computer devices that can handle the algorithms for us make it easier to use strong encryption, but with that also comes the ease of breaking encryption.

### Cryptography vs Encryption vs Encoding vs Hashing
When first foraying into cryptography, a lot of words get thrown around – encryption, encoding, hashing – it can feel incredibly overwhelming. There is a difference between these, though the lines have been muddied over the years.

**Cryptography** is the whole field that encompasses multiple technologies, techniques, processes and more. Cryptography includes encryption, encoding and hashing.

**Encryption**is the process of converting data from human readable to non-human readable through the use of mathematical algorithms and keys. Keys are required to encrypt the data and also to read and reconstruct the encrypted information.

**Encoding** (or character encoding) is the process of applying a specific code (not necessarily mathematical) of letters, numbers and symbols to plaintext to turn it into ciphertext. With encoded ciphertext, all the necessary information to reconstruct the message is included.

**Hashing** is the process of taking a file or some data and representing it with a short hash value. These are often generated by algorithms, yet this is not the same as encryption. Encryption is a two-way process, with a key to encrypt and decrypt the data. Hashing has no keys and is often seen as a one-way process. Encryption will protect data while hashing can confirm that the data hasn't been tampered with.

### How Does Cryptography Work?
When looking at how cryptography works, you’ll often get an answer which is, technically, how encryption works. As encryption is a large portion of cryptography they often get lumped together. For the purposes of this lab and to be consistent with answers you'd get on the internet, we'll provide the low down on how encryption works.

At a high level, encryption works by using an algorithm (of which there are many) and often a key. In some cases the sender and receiver have the same key (symmetric-key encryption) while others have two different keys for sender and receiver (asymmetric-key encryption).

How the data is encrypted with these keys depends entirely on the algorithm used. Over time, weaknesses are found with certain algorithms and others are developed to take their place. Some well-known cryptographic algorithms include:

1. Triple DES
2. AES
3. RSA
4. Blowfish
5. Twofish

### Cryptography And You
Though you may not see it, cryptography is used everywhere, from encrypting your messages on mobile messaging apps, to digital certificates and signatures on websites you visit. It keeps your financial information safe, protects your personal information and protects sensitive corporate information.

At the end of the day it:
* Keeps data confidential
* Ensures the integrity of the data
* Authenticates the sender and receiver’s identities
* Proves that the sender is the actual sender, known as non-repudiation